# VASTO_laboratory

Here you can find the information and the bibliography about Varchi an VASTO's project.

## Bibliography suggested by Dario Brancato
### General Period
About the historical period, Dario Brancato suggests to get an idea of the historical events of Florence by reading also from a common history manual the chapters concerning the wars of Italy ([1494-1559](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Italian_Wars)). In particular he suggests to read the events that do not directly concern Florence, but which have indirectly an impact on the city, i.e. [the pontificate of Clement VII](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pope_Clement_VII) (Julius of Giuliano de'Medici) and [the Sack of Rome](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sack_of_Rome_(1527)) (1527).
From this last event arose the rebellion in Florence that drove out the Medici and meant that a republic, that lasted until 1530, inspired by the Savonarolian princes was proclaimed , when precisely, after a year of siege, the Medici were replaced in command of Florence by Charles V and the duchy was established, first with Alexander and then, after his assassination (1537), with Cosimo (1519-1574). To get an idea of the transition from the republic to the principality, the essay  by R. von Albertini,<b> Florence from the republic to the principality, tr. it., Turin, Einaudi, 1970</b>, is suggested.


### Varchi
Varchi was a direct witness of the last Florentine republican experience, which always remained in his heart. The description of the city he made in the 9th book of 'Storia Fiorentina' is precisely the description of Florence before the siege, a city which had undergone profound changes in urban planning already at the time when he wrote History (after 1546 and until his death, 1565), first of all the construction of the Fortezza da Basso, commissioned by Duke Alessandro.

Varchi is a multifaceted character, who eludes the traditional classifications of our literary stories, that often brand Varchi as a "polygraph". Varchi was above all a poet and an academic: in fact we have many Tuscan and Latin compositions important for the history of classicism (and Petrarchism) in Florence; academic production, which was divided into lessons, comments and treatises.
Dario Barcato only expressed a few aspects here: on the one hand the impulse given to art history with the comparison between painting and sculpture and the theoretical reflection on the two disciplines; on the other, his position within the question of language that opens the field to the development of The [*Accademia della Crusca*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accademia_della_Crusca): his first animator, [Lionardo Salviati](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lionardo_Salviati), was not by chance a pupil of Varchi; finally, Varchi wa a critic of literature, with an insistent return on a type of poetry (vulgar poetry) capable of transmitting philosophical contents. Philosophy, however, also formed his work as a historian, as can be read in the pages of the Proemio della Storia fiorentina. In reality, Varchi's contribution to Italian culture (and beyond) is far more important.

A good bibliography about Varchi suggested by Dario Brancato is formed by:
- the collection of essays by Salvatore Lo Re, *Politica e cultura nella Firenze cosimiana*, Manziana, Vecchiarelli, 2008;
- By Andreoni *La via della dottrina*, Pisa, ETS, 2012 (paricularly chapter 1)

### Storia Fioentina
As Storia Fiorentina, in addition to the essay by von Albertini, Dario Brancato suggested the introductory note by Angelo Baiocchi to Florentine historians and politicians of the sixteenth century, Milan-Naples, Ricciardi, 1994, on pp. 735-752, the article by V. Bramanti Viatico for the Florentine History of Benedetto Varchi, «Rivista Storica Italiana», 114.3 (2002), pp. 880-928, now in Id., Men and books of the Florentine sixteenth century, Manziana, Vecchiarelli, 2017, pp. 147-200; and mine and Lo Re's attached here.
Handwritten and printed tradition. A first census of the manuscripts can be found in the note by Simone Albonico to the Florentine historians and politicians mentioned above (pages 1073-1090), in this study the article with Lo Re mentioned above and two of my chapters, which is found here and here the second is being printed and will come out for a miscellaneous edited by Lucia Felici and entitled Florence in the religious crisis of the sixteenth century (1498-1569).
It must be kept in mind that Varchi died suddenly while we were learning the transfer from Florence to Montevarchi.His cards were kept for a while in a room whose key was the treasurer of Duke Cosimo and then they were shared among some of his students. The books and materials of history were kept by Cosimo who around 1569 flanked his secretary and doctor Baccio Baldini in an operation to censor the text, in view of a publication that in fact did not take place. The censors conducted their work on the more advanced editorial work of the work moving relatively well among the author papers. The result is the manuscript of dedication today in Parma (Biblioteca Palatina, Palatino 342 = Pr3), from which the manuscript vulgate derives. However, we will work on the author's materials, in particular the cod.Corsiniano 1352 of the National Library of the Lincei and Corsiniana (= RC4) which offers the advantage of grasping exactly the parts removed from the work.
For the IX Book of History, it is worth remembering what was written by the father of Renaissance studies, Jakob Burkhardt (The civilization of the Renaissance in Italy, tr. It. By Diego Valbusa, Florence, Sansoni, 1876, p. 108): « For the first half of the sixteenth century then no city perhaps in the world has a document similar to the splendid description of Florence left by Varchi ».
The work was printed for the first time in Augsburg (with the fake location in Cologne) in 1721 by the Florentine exile Francesco Settimanni, who published the story in the wild not without controversy in Florence and elsewhere. Weeks contaminated the text by reinstating in some places (in particular the Proemio) the parts that had been censored by Baldini. What happened? Weeks had managed to get some fragments from author materials in which the censorship did not appear (older witnesses of RC4). These fragments had been around for several decades.
The edition of Florentine History that is still mentioned today is the one edited by Lelio Arbib in 1843-44 and available on Google Books (vol. 1; vol. 2; vol. 3). Book IX is located at the beginning of the second volume. Of this edition there is also the digitized version in OCR on the Bivio site of the SNS. The handwritten tradition of Book IX is somewhat peculiar compared to that of other books: there are blanks and first editions in the code National Central Library of Florence (= BNCF) II.II.138 (= FN9); the first editorial in clean is in cod. BNCF II.II.139 (= FN10): here however Varchi began to eliminate many passages, especially from the description of Florence; from FN10 post correctionem two copies were made: RC4 and the one today in cod. BNCF II.I.176 (= FN7). FN7 was further revised by Varchi, who added some small details in his own hand; yet this editorial staff, in fact the last author, was not taken into consideration by the censors, who worked on RC4."*
